---
title: Welcome to Programming
date: 2025-02-08
---
> Introduction to Programming with JavaScript
- JavaScript is most well-known for being the programming language of the web.
	- Nearly all of the interactivity you experience online, like drop-down menus or the autocomplete function, is facilitated by JavaScript. 
- Now, it is used not only for the front-end development, but also for back-end development, and you can even create mobile apps using JavaScript and React.
- One of the unique things about JavaScript that no other language has is that it's a language that can be used for writing the front-end and the back-end.

> Introduction to Programming
- All these programs are called software and are in one way or another running on physical machines which are referred to as hardware.
- Programming is simply the process of writing the steps a computer needs to take to complete a certain task.
- To program these instructions, we use programming languages.
	- A programming language is sort of like a bridge that we use to facilitate communication between computers and people. 
- ==For a computer to understand a programming language, it needs to save it somewhere in its random access memory RAM or on a disk in binary code==, which is represented by a series of zeros and ones. 
	- The binary code is a representation of machine language that a computer can understand all of the zeros and ones in binary language represent electrical switches. 
- Finally, a ==computer's central processing unit, or CPU== can comprehend these binary electrical signals and update itself accordingly.
- This machine language, with its series of zeros and ones, is known as a ==low level language because it's closer to being understood by a computer's CPU.==

> Why JavaScript?
- The zeros and ones of binary code is a low-level language because it's closer to being understood by a CPU. JavaScript on the other hand is a high-level language. 
	- ==This means that it has to be converted to binary code so that a CPU can work with it.==
- JavaScript is a language that builds interactivity into web pages. 
	- ==It is literally the language of the web.==
	- Typescript compiles down to JavaScript so browsers can understand it. 
- Since JavaScript is one of the most widely available and frequently used methods for ==interacting with the browser on the client side,== the language became immensely popular.
	- JavaScript is currently the only computer language that allows us to directly interact with our web pages dynamically on the client. ==It's baked into the browser.==
- Its enduring popularity is down to the rules of ==backwards compatibility==, which states that all websites that were built in the past still need to work today. 
	- So removing JavaScript from the browser would effectively render millions of websites completely useless.
- Simple as opening the browser's developer tools and navigating to the console tab because ==every browser has a JavaScript engine built in and you can interact with it using the console.== 
- JavaScript is used in almost every website there is. 
	 - It's used on the client side of sites as plain JavaScript also known as ==vanilla JavaScript.== It fuels a myriad of ==JavaScript frameworks such as Reac==t, Vue, and D3 
	- ==Used on the server as Node.js== and more recently Deno.

